Mike-ko is dead. Kuro is no match for me as a companion, and while I feel a certain sense of desolation, I fortunately have made acquaintances among humans, so I do not find life particularly tedious. Not long ago, a man wrote a letter requesting a photograph of me to be sent to my master. Recently, someone even went so far as to send a gift of Okayama’s famous millet dumplings specifically addressed to me. As I receive more and more sympathy from humans, I am gradually beginning to forget that I am a cat. I feel as though I have shifted from the feline world and moved closer to the human one; consequently, I have absolutely no intention these days of rallying my kin to settle scores with the "two-legged teachers." On the contrary, I have evolved to the point where I occasionally consider myself a member of the human world, which is a heartening development. It is not that I despise my own kind. It is simply a natural tendency to seek peace among those whose nature and disposition are most similar to one's own, and I would be quite troubled if this were labeled as a change of heart, flippancy, or betrayal. It seems that those who use such language to berate others are mostly narrow-minded, poverty-stricken men with no flexibility. Having thus outgrown the habits of a cat, I cannot spend all my time worrying about the likes of Mike-ko or Kuro. I find myself wanting to evaluate the thoughts, words, and actions of humans with a dignity equal to theirs. This, too, is only natural. However, despite my having such a high level of discernment, my master still regards me as little more than an ordinary kitten with a bit more fur; I find it quite regrettable that he devoured all the millet dumplings himself as if they were his own, without a single word of greeting to me. He also seems to have neglected to take my photograph and send it off. If I were to complain, this would certainly be a grievance, but the master is the master and I am I; there is nothing to be done if our natural viewpoints differ. Since I have fully assumed the persona of a human, the actions of cats—with whom I no longer associate—are somewhat difficult to put to paper. I shall take my leave of them and satisfy myself with discussing the reputations of Meitei, Kangetsu, and the other gentlemen.

Today being a Sunday of fine weather, the master emerged listlessly from his study, laid out his brushes, inkstone, and manuscript paper beside me, and lay flat on his stomach, groaning incessantly at something. Expecting him to let out some strange noise as a prelude to starting his draft, I watched closely. After a considerable while, he wrote in bold strokes: "A single stick of incense." I wondered if this was to be a poem or a haiku; "a single stick of incense" seemed a bit too refined for my master. But before I could think further, he left it at that, started a new line, and scribbled: "I have been thinking for a while about writing of Tennen Koji." His brush stopped abruptly and moved no more. Holding the brush, the master tilted his head, but seeing no brilliant idea forthcoming, he began to lick the tip of the brush. Just as I noticed his lips had turned pitch black, he drew a small circle beneath the text. He added two dots for eyes inside the circle. In the center, he drew a nose with flared nostrils and pulled a horizontal line straight across for a mouth. This was neither prose nor haiku. Apparently disgusted with himself, he hastily smeared over the face to erase it. The master started a new line again. He seemed to believe that as long as he changed lines, it would somehow become a poem, a eulogy, a chronicle, or a record of some sort. Eventually, he dashed off the following in a single breath: "Tennen Koji is a person who researches space, reads the Analects, eats roasted sweet potatoes, and has a runny nose." It was a rather cluttered sentence. Then the master read it aloud without reservation and laughed—unusually for him—saying, "Hahaha! How amusing!" But then he added, "The bit about the runny nose is a bit harsh; I’ll delete it," and drew a line through that phrase. Where one line would have sufficed, he drew two, then three, creating neat parallel lines, continuing even as they bled into the other rows. When eight lines were lined up and still no subsequent phrase appeared, he threw down his brush and began twisting his mustache. He twisted and curled it up and down with an intensity that suggested he would wring a sentence out of it for us to see. Just then, the mistress emerged from the dining room and sat right in front of the master’s nose.

"Dear, a moment," she called.

"What is it?" the master replied in a voice like a gong being struck underwater.

Dissatisfied with the reply, the mistress started over: "Dear, a moment."

"What is it, I say!" This time, he stuck his thumb and forefinger into his nostril and gave a nose hair a sharp yank.

"We’re a bit short this month..."

"We shouldn't be. I paid the doctor for the medicine, and I paid the bookstore last month, didn't I? We should have a surplus this month," he said coolly, gazing at the pulled nose hair as if it were one of the wonders of the world.

"But you’ve been eating bread instead of rice, and licking jam..."

"Just how many jars of jam have I licked, then?"

"Eight jars came in this month."

"Eight? I don't recall licking that many."

"It's not just you; the children lick it too."

"Even if we lick that much, it's only five or six yen," the master said with a straight face, carefully "planting" his nose hairs one by one onto the manuscript paper. Because they had a bit of flesh attached, they stood up straight like needles. The master, looking impressed by his unexpected discovery, gave a puff of breath. Due to their strong stickiness, they did not fly away at all.

"Terribly stubborn, aren't they?" the master said, blowing with all his might.

"It's not just the jam; there are other things we have to buy," the mistress said, her cheeks swelling with indignation.

"I suppose there might be," the master said, thrusting his fingers back in and yanking out more nose hairs. Among the red, black, and various other colors, there was one pure white hair. Looking greatly shocked and staring at it as if to bore a hole through it, he held it between his fingers and thrust it before the mistress's face.

"Oh, how disgusting!" the mistress said, grimacing and pushing his hand back.

"Look here! A white hair in the nose!" the master said, appearing deeply moved. Even the mistress entered the dining room with a laugh; she seemed to have abandoned the economic issue. The master returned to Tennen Koji.

Having driven away the mistress with a nose hair, the master looked relieved and seemed anxious to write his manuscript while yanking more hairs, but his brush would not move. "Eating sweet potatoes is redundant; I'll cut it," he said, finally striking out that phrase as well. "'A single stick of incense' is also too abrupt; stop that," he added, mercilessly striking it out with his brush. All that remained was the single sentence: "Tennen Koji is a person who researches space and reads the Analects." The master thought this seemed a bit too simple, but then, deciding it was too much trouble, he said, "To hell with the prose; I'll just write an epitaph," and swinging his brush in a cross, he vigorously drew an orchid in the clumsy style of a literati painting on the manuscript paper. All his hard-won effort had failed to leave even a single character behind. Then, turning the paper over, he began to string together ambiguous words: "Born in space, researched space, died in space. Empty, interval, Tennen Koji, alas!" Just then, Meitei entered as usual. Meitei treats other people's houses as his own; he stomped right up without asking for entry. Moreover, he occasionally drifts in through the kitchen door. He is a man who seems to have shaken off all worry, reserve, constraint, and hardship at the moment of his birth.

"Still working on 'The Giant Gravity'?" he asked, standing over the master.

"No, I don't always write about 'The Giant Gravity.' I am composing an epitaph for Tennen Koji," the master said grandly.

"Tennen Koji? Is that a posthumous Buddhist name like 'Guzan Doji' (Accidental Acolyte)?" Meitei said, as irresponsible as ever.

"Is there such a name as 'Accidental Acolyte'?"

"Oh, probably not, but I imagine it would be something like that."

"I don't know any 'Accidental Acolyte,' but 'Tennen Koji' is a man you know."

"And who on earth is going around calling himself Tennen Koji?"

"It's Sorozaki. He graduated and entered graduate school to research something called 'Space Theory,' but he studied too hard and died of peritonitis. Sorozaki was a dear friend of mine, after all."

"A dear friend is fine; I'm not saying it's bad. But who was it that transformed Sorozaki into 'Tennen Koji'?"

"I did. I gave it to him. In the first place, there's nothing as vulgar as the posthumous names given by priests," the master boasted, as if "Tennen Koji" were an exceedingly refined name.

Meitei laughed and picked up the manuscript. "Well, let's see this epitaph of yours... 'Born in space, researched space, died in space. Empty, interval, Tennen Koji, alas!'" he read aloud. "Indeed, this is good. Quite fitting for Tennen Koji."

The master asked happily, "Is it good?"

"You should carve this epitaph onto a pickling stone and toss it behind the main hall of a temple like a weight-lifting stone. It would be very refined; Tennen Koji’s soul would surely rest in peace."

"I was thinking of doing just that," the master replied quite seriously. Then, without waiting for Meitei's reply, he drifted out, saying, "Excuse me for a moment; I'll be right back. Go ahead and play with the cat or something."