I am a cat. As yet I have no name.

I have no idea where I was born. All I remember is that I was meowing in a dark, damp place. It was there that I saw a human being for the first time. Moreover, I later heard that this was a "student," the most ferocious breed of the human race. These students, it is said, occasionally catch us, boil us, and eat us. However, at the time, I had no such thoughts, so I didn't feel particularly afraid. I only remember a sort of fluffy feeling when I was placed in his palm and suddenly lifted up. It was probably when I had settled down a bit on his palm and looked at the student’s face that I first beheld what is called a human. The strange impression I had then remains with me even now. To begin with, the face, which should have been adorned with fur, was as smooth as a tea kettle. Since then, I have met many cats, but I have never encountered such a deformity. Not only that, but the center of his face protruded excessively. And from those holes, he occasionally blew out puffs of smoke. It was terribly stifling and quite distressing. Only recently have I learned that this is tobacco, which humans smoke.

I sat comfortably in the palm of this student for a while, but soon we began to move at a tremendous speed. Whether the student was moving or only I was moving, I could not tell, but I became dizzy beyond measure. I felt sick to my stomach. Just as I thought I was surely done for, there was a loud thud, and sparks flew from my eyes. I remember up to that point, but after that, no matter how hard I try to think, I cannot recall anything.

When I suddenly came to my senses, the student was gone. My many siblings were nowhere to be seen. Even my mother, the most important of all, had vanished. Furthermore, unlike the place I had been until then, it was blindingly bright. I could hardly keep my eyes open. Thinking that something was certainly wrong, I crawled out slowly, only to find it extremely painful. I had been suddenly thrown from the straw into a bamboo grove.

After much effort, I managed to crawl out of the bamboo grove, only to find a large pond ahead. I sat before the pond and wondered what I should do. No particular idea came to mind. After a while, I thought that if I cried, the student might come to fetch me again. I tried a few "Meow, meow"s, but no one came. Meanwhile, a rustling wind blew over the pond, and the sun began to set. I grew ravenously hungry. I wanted to cry, but my voice would not come out. There was nothing for it; I resolved to walk until I found some food, and I slowly began to circle the pond to the left. It was terribly painful. Gritting my teeth and forcing myself along, I finally reached a place that somehow smelled of humans. Thinking that if I entered here, things might work out, I slipped into the grounds through a hole in a broken bamboo fence. Fate is a strange thing; had this fence not been broken, I might have starved to death by the roadside. "The shade of a single tree" is a well-said proverb. This hole in the fence remains to this day my passage when I visit the calico cat next door. Now, though I had sneaked into the estate, I did not know what to do next. In the meantime, it grew dark, my stomach grew empty, it was cold, and to top it all off, it began to rain. I could no longer afford a moment’s delay. Having no choice, I walked toward the direction that seemed bright and warm. Looking back now, I had already entered the house by then. There, I encountered the opportunity to see a human other than that student for the second time. The first I met was O-san, the maid. She was far more violent than the previous student; the moment she saw me, she suddenly grabbed me by the scruff of the neck and threw me outside. I thought, "Ah, this is no good," so I closed my eyes and left my fate to heaven. However, I could not bear the hunger and the cold. Watching for a moment when O-san was distracted, I crawled back up into the kitchen. Soon after, I was thrown out again. I remember repeating the same thing four or five times: being thrown out and crawling back up, crawling back up and being thrown out. At that time, I grew utterly disgusted with the one called O-san. Only recently, when I stole her fish and got my revenge, did I finally feel relieved. Just as I was about to be turned out for the last time, the master of the house came out, asking what all the noise was about. The maid, dangling me before the master, said, "This stray kitten keeps coming up into the kitchen no matter how many times I put it out, and it's quite a nuisance." The master, twisting the black hair under his nose, gazed at my face for a while, and eventually said, "Well then, let it stay inside," and went back into the inner room. The master seemed to be a man of few words. The maid, looking vexed, tossed me into the kitchen. Thus, I finally decided to make this house my home.

My master rarely meets me face to face. His profession, I hear, is that of a teacher. When he returns from school, he shuts himself in his study all day and almost never comes out. The people of the house think he is a great scholar. He himself pretends to be a hard worker. In reality, however, he is not the diligent man his family claims. I sometimes peek into his study on tiptoe, and I often find him taking a nap. Occasionally, he drivels on the book he has been reading. He suffers from a weak stomach, and his skin has a pale yellowish tint, showing signs of lack of elasticity and inactivity. Despite this, he eats a great deal. After eating a great deal, he takes Taka-Diastase. After taking it, he opens a book. After reading two or three pages, he becomes sleepy. He drivels on the book. This is the routine he repeats every night. Even as a cat, I sometimes think: "Being a teacher is truly an easy life. If I were born human, I should definitely become a teacher. If one can hold a job while sleeping this much, even a cat could do it." Yet, according to the master, there is nothing as difficult as being a teacher, and whenever a friend visits, he grumbles about one thing or another.

When I first moved into this house, I was very unpopular with everyone except the master. Wherever I went, I was kicked aside, and no one would deal with me. How little I was valued can be seen from the fact that, to this day, they haven't even given me a name. Having no choice, I made an effort to stay by the side of the master, who had taken me in, as much as possible. When the master reads the newspaper in the morning, I always sit on his lap. When he takes a nap, I always sit on his back. This is not necessarily because I like the master, but because there was no one else to attend to me, so I had no choice. Later, after various experiences, I decided to sleep on the rice container in the morning, on the kotatsu in the evening, and on the veranda on sunny afternoons. But the most pleasant thing is to crawl into the children's bed at night and sleep with them. These children are five and three years old; at night, the two of them share one bed in a single room. I always find a space to fit myself between them and somehow wedge my way in, but if one of the children happens to wake up, it's a disaster. The children—especially the younger one—are ill-natured; they start crying at the top of their lungs, even in the middle of the night, shouting, "The cat's here! The cat's here!" Then, the nervous, dyspeptic master inevitably wakes up and comes flying out from the next room. Why, just the other day, I was severely beaten on my backside with a ruler.

The more I live with humans and observe them, the more I am forced to conclude that they are selfish. Especially regarding the children I sometimes sleep with, their behavior is beyond description. When it suits them, they hold me upside down, put a bag over my head, throw me around, or shove me into the cooking furnace. Furthermore, if I so much as raise a paw, the whole household chases me around and persecutes me. Just the other day, when I sharpened my claws slightly on the tatami, the mistress became extremely angry, and since then, she rarely lets me into the sitting room. Even if I am shivering on the wooden floor of the kitchen, she is quite indifferent. My respected friend, Shiro-kun, who lives across the way, says every time we meet that there is nothing as heartless as a human. Shiro-kun recently gave birth to four jewel-like kittens. However, it is said that the student at that house took them to the pond out back on the third day and threw all four of them in. Shiro-kun told me the whole story with tears in her eyes and said that for us cats to fulfill our parental love and lead a beautiful family life, we must fight against humans and exterminate them. I think her argument is entirely reasonable. Also, Mike-kun next door is greatly indignant, saying that humans do not understand the concept of property rights. Originally, among our kind, whoever finds the head of a dried sardine or the gizzard of a gray mullet first has the right to eat it. If the other party does not observe this rule, one is justified in resorting to physical force. Yet humans seem to have no such notion at all, and any delicacies we find are invariably plundered by them. Relying on their strength, they coolly take away what we are rightfully entitled to eat. Shiro-kun lives in a soldier's house, and Mike-kun has a lawyer as a master. Since I live in a teacher's house, I am rather more optimistic about such matters than those two. I am content if I can just get by from day to day. No matter how great humans may be, they won't prosper forever. It's best to wait patiently for the "time of the cat."

Speaking of selfishness, let me tell a short story about a failure my master had due to this selfishness of his. Originally, this master of mine had nothing particularly outstanding about him, but he liked to dabble in everything. He writes haiku and sends them to Hototogisu, submits new-style poetry to Myojo, writes English full of mistakes, occasionally becomes obsessed with archery, learns Noh chanting, and at other times makes a "boo-boo" sound on the violin; but unfortunately, none of them come to anything. Despite that, once he starts, he is strangely enthusiastic for someone with a weak stomach. He chants Noh in the toilet, and although he has been nicknamed "The Toilet Sensei" by the neighbors, he is quite unconcerned, and continues to repeat, "This is Taira no Munemori..." Everyone bursts out laughing, saying, "There goes Munemori again." For some reason, about a month after I moved in, on a payday, this master came home hurriedly carrying a large bundle. Wondering what he had bought, it turned out to be watercolors, brushes, and Whatman paper; it seemed he had decided to give up Noh chanting and haiku from today and start painting. Indeed, from the next day, for the time being, he spent every single day in his study, not even taking a nap, doing nothing but painting. However, looking at the finished products, no one could tell what on earth he had painted. Perhaps he himself thought he wasn't very good, for one day, when a friend of his, who does something called aesthetics, came to visit, I heard them having the following conversation.

"I just can't seem to paint well," the master lamented. "When you look at someone else's, it seems like nothing, but when you take up the brush yourself, you realize how difficult it is." This was indeed an honest confession. His friend, looking at the master's face over his gold-rimmed spectacles, said, "You can't expect to be good right from the start. In the first place, you can't paint just by imagining things indoors. The great Italian master Andrea del Sarto once said: 'If you want to paint, sketch nature itself. There are stars in the sky. There is the splendor of dew on the earth. There are birds that fly. There are beasts that run. There are goldfish in the pond. There are crows in the winter on withered trees. Nature is a single great living painting.' How about it? If you want to paint a real picture, why don't you try some sketching from life?"

"Oh, did Andrea del Sarto say such a thing? I didn't know that at all. I see, that makes sense. Truly, that's exactly right," the master said, immensely impressed. Behind the gold rims, a mocking smile was visible.

The next day, as usual, I was out on the veranda taking a pleasant nap, when the master, contrary to his habit, came out of his study and began doing something intently behind me. I suddenly woke up and, opening my eyes a crack for about a minute to see what he was doing, I saw that he was heart and soul playing the part of Andrea del Sarto. Seeing this, I could not help but burst into a secret laugh. Having been teased by his friend, he was starting his sketching with me as his first subject. I had already slept enough. I was dying to yawn. However, thinking it would be a pity to move while the master was so earnestly wielding his brush, I endured it patiently. He had now finished my outline and was coloring around the face. I must confess: as a cat, I am by no means a superior specimen. Whether in terms of my back, my fur, or the features of my face, I do not think I am at all superior to other cats. But no matter how homely I may be, I cannot possibly believe I have such a strange form as that which is now being depicted by my master. First of all, the color is wrong. I have pale grey skin with a yellowish tint, like a Persian cat, with lacquer-like spots. I believe this is an undeniable fact to anyone who sees me. Yet, looking at the master's coloring, it is neither yellow nor black, neither grey nor brown; nor is it a mixture of these. It is a color that can only be described as "a certain kind of color." Furthermore, the strange thing is that there are no eyes. Granted, he was sketching me while I was asleep, so it's understandable, but since not even a hint of an eye is visible, it's unclear whether it's a blind cat or a sleeping cat. In my heart, I thought that even Andrea del Sarto could do nothing with this. But I could not help but admire his enthusiasm. I wanted to stay still for him if possible, but I had been feeling the urge to urinate for some time. My muscles were twitching. It reached a point where I could not delay for another minute, so I had no choice but to excuse myself; I stretched both my front legs as far as they would go, pushed my neck out low, and let out a huge yawn. Well, once it came to this, there was no point in being well-behaved anymore. Since I had already ruined the master's plan, I thought I might as well go to the back to relieve myself and crawled out slowly. Then the master, in a voice mixed with disappointment and anger, shouted from the sitting room, "You idiot!" Whenever the master curses someone, it is his habit to say "You idiot." Since he knows no other way to insult people, it can't be helped, but I think it's rude of him to call me an idiot without knowing how much I had endured. If he usually looked kindly upon me when I climb on his back, I might accept this abuse, but he has never done anything pleasant for my convenience; calling me an idiot just because I stood up to pee is too much. Humans are all conceited, relying on their own power. Unless someone a bit stronger than them comes along to take them down a peg, there's no telling how far their arrogance will go.

I can tolerate this much selfishness, but I have heard reports about human immorality that are many times more saddening than this.

Behind my house, there is a tea garden of about ten tsubo. It is not large, but it is a neat and pleasant, sunny spot. When the children are so noisy that I cannot take a peaceful nap, or when I am bored and my stomach is out of order, I always come out here to cultivate my "magnanimous spirit." It was around two o'clock on a calm day in late autumn. After a pleasant post-lunch nap, I walked to this tea garden for some exercise. While sniffing the roots of the tea plants one by one, I came to the cedar hedge on the west side and found a large cat sleeping soundly on top of some flattened withered chrysanthemums. He seemed entirely unaware of my approach, or perhaps he was aware but indifferent; he lay there stretched out, snoring loudly. I could not help but be secretly amazed at the boldness of one who could sleep so peacefully while trespassing on someone else's grounds. He was a pure black cat. The sun, having just passed its zenith, cast its transparent rays upon his fur, and it seemed as if invisible flames were burning from between his glistening hairs. He had a physique so grand he might be called the king of cats. He was surely twice my size. Overwhelmed by admiration and curiosity, I forgot myself and stood before him, gazing intently. A gentle autumn wind lightly swayed the branches of a paulownia tree rising above the cedar hedge, and two or three leaves fell clattering into the thicket of withered chrysanthemums. The "king" snapped his perfectly round eyes open. I remember it even now. Those eyes shone far more beautifully than the amber that humans prize. He did not move. Gathering a piercing light from the depths of his pupils onto my small forehead, he said, "What the hell are you?" I thought his language was a bit vulgar for a king, but since his voice possessed a power that could crush even a dog, I felt no small amount of fear. However, thinking it would be dangerous not to greet him, I replied as coldly and calmly as possible, "I am a cat. As yet I have no name." But at that moment, my heart was certainly beating faster than usual. He said in a tone of great contempt, "What? A cat? Don't make me laugh. Where the hell do you live?" He was quite insolent. "I live in the house of the teacher here." "I thought as much. You're awfully scrawny, aren't you?" the king said, blowing off steam. Judging from his manner of speech, he didn't seem to be a cat from a good family. However, seeing how greasy and fat he was, he seemed to be eating well and living in abundance. I couldn't help but ask, "And who might you be?" "I'm Kuro, from the rickshaw shop," he said proudly. Kuro of the rickshaw shop is a notorious bully cat in this neighborhood. However, being from a rickshaw shop, he is only strong and has no education at all, so no one really associates with him. He is the target of a "collective avoidance" policy. Hearing his name, I felt a bit of a tickle of fear in my tail, but at the same time, a slight sense of contempt arose. I decided to test how ignorant he was and had the following exchange.

"I wonder, which is greater, a rickshaw man or a teacher?"
"The rickshaw man is stronger, obviously. Look at your master; he's nothing but skin and bones."
"You certainly look strong, being a rickshaw cat. It seems you get plenty of treats living there."
"What, as for me, I don't expect to have any trouble finding food wherever I go. Instead of just wandering around tea gardens, why don't you try following me for a bit? You'll be so fat you won't recognize yourself in less than a month."
"I'll take you up on that later. But it seems the teacher lives in a larger house than the rickshaw man."
"You blockhead! No matter how big a house is, it won't fill your belly!"

He seemed to be in a great huff; he twitched his ears, which looked like whittled bamboo, and walked away roughly. This was how I became acquainted with Kuro of the rickshaw shop.

Since then, I have encountered Kuro many times. Every time we meet, he vents his rickshaw-style arrogance. The incident of immorality I mentioned hearing about was actually something I heard from Kuro.

One day, while Kuro and I were lying in the warm tea garden as usual, chatting about various things, he repeated his usual boastful stories as if they were new, and then asked me the following question: "How many rats have you caught so far?" Although I believed my intellect was far more developed than Kuro's, I was prepared for the fact that I was no match for him in physical strength and courage. Nevertheless, when faced with this question, I felt quite embarrassed. But since facts are facts and cannot be falsified, I replied, "Actually, I've been meaning to catch one, but I haven't caught any yet." Kuro vibrated the long whiskers protruding from the tip of his nose and laughed heartily. Originally, Kuro had a bit of a missing link in his character because of his boasting; if you listened to him intently, purring as if you were impressed by his bravado, he was a very easy cat to manage. Having grasped this knack soon after becoming acquainted with him, I thought it would be foolish to try and defend myself and make matters worse; I decided it would be better to let him talk about his own exploits and gloss over the matter. So I calmly encouraged him, saying, "A cat of your years must have caught quite a lot." Sure enough, he charged into the opening. "Not that many, but maybe thirty or forty," was his proud reply. He continued, "I can handle a hundred or two hundred rats by myself anytime, but those weasels are more than I can bargain for. I once had a terrible time with a weasel." "Is that so?" I chimed in. Kuro blinked his large eyes and said, "It was during the spring cleaning last year. When my master crawled under the veranda with a bag of lime, a big weasel jumped out in surprise." "Hmm," I said, looking impressed. "A weasel is just a slightly larger rat. Thinking 'You brute!', I chased him and finally cornered him in a ditch." "Well done!" I cheered. "But you see, when it came to the crunch, the fellow let off a 'final fart.' The smell was beyond description. Since then, whenever I see a weasel, I feel sick to my stomach." At this point, as if he could still smell last year's stench, he lifted his front paw and rubbed the tip of his nose two or three times. I felt a bit sorry for him. Thinking I'd cheer him up a bit, I said, "But if it's a rat, it's doomed once you set your eyes on it. You're such an expert at catching rats, and you eat so many of them, that's why you're so fat and have such a good coat." This question, intended to please Kuro, unexpectedly produced the opposite result. He gave a deep sigh and said, "It's all a waste when you think about it. No matter how hard you work to catch rats—there's no one in the world as unscrupulous as a human. They take away all the rats you've caught and carry them off to the police box. Since the police don't know who caught them, they give five sen every time. My master has already made about one yen and fifty sen thanks to me, and yet he never gives me anything decent to eat. Hey, humans are just polite thieves." It seemed that even the uneducated Kuro understood this much logic, for he looked quite angry, with the fur on his back standing up. I felt a bit uneasy, so I made some excuse and went home. From that time on, I resolved never to catch a rat. However, I did not become Kuro's underling and go around hunting for other delicacies. Sleeping is more relaxing than eating fine food. It seems that living in a teacher's house makes a cat take on a teacher's nature. If I'm not careful, I might become dyspeptic myself.

Speaking of teachers, it seems my master has recently realized that there is no hope for him in watercolor painting, for he wrote the following in his diary on December 1st:

Met a person called OO at today's gathering for the first time. They say he's led a very dissipated life, and indeed he has the air of a man of the world. Since this type of person is liked by women, it might be more appropriate to say he was forced to lead a dissipated life rather than that he chose to. His wife is said to be a geisha; I'm envious. Originally, most people who speak ill of libertines are those who lack the qualifications to be one. Also, among those who pride themselves on being libertines, many lack the qualifications. They force themselves into it even though they aren't compelled. It's just like my watercolor painting; there's no chance of ever mastering it. Nevertheless, they go around thinking they are men of the world. If the argument holds that one can become a man of the world just by drinking at a restaurant or going to a waiting house, then by the same logic, I could become a fine watercolor painter. Just as it would be better for me not to paint my watercolors, a rustic boor is far superior to a foolish "man of the world."

I can't quite agree with his theory on "men of the world." Also, his remark about envying a man with a geisha for a wife is a foolish thought that a teacher should not utter, but his critical eye regarding his own watercolor painting is certainly accurate. Despite having such self-knowledge, the master's vanity does not easily disappear. Two days later, in his diary for December 4th, he wrote:

Last night, I dreamed that someone had taken the watercolor I had thrown aside, thinking it would never amount to anything, put it in a splendid frame, and hung it on the transoms. Looking at it in the frame, I had suddenly become quite good. I was very happy. Gazing at it by myself, thinking 'This is quite a masterpiece,' the dawn broke, I woke up, and it became clear with the morning sun that I was as bad as ever.

It seems the master carries his lingering attachment to watercolors even into his dreams. At this rate, he can become neither a watercolorist nor a "man of the world," as he calls them.

The day after the master dreamed of watercolors, that gold-rimmed aesthetician visited him after a long absence. As soon as he sat down, he opened with: "How is the painting coming along?" The master, with a calm face, said, "Following your advice, I am concentrating on sketching from life. Indeed, by sketching, I seem to understand the shapes of things and the subtle changes in color that I hadn't noticed before. It seems Western painting developed as it has today as a result of emphasizing sketching from life since olden times. Truly, Andrea del Sarto was right," he said, not mentioning the diary entry at all, and once again expressing his admiration for Andrea del Sarto. The aesthetician, laughing, scratched his head and said, "Actually, my friend, that was all nonsense." "What was?" The master had not yet realized he had been teased. "What I mean is that story about Andrea del Sarto that you've been admiring so much. I just made that up. I didn't think you'd believe it so seriously, ha ha ha!" He was in high spirits. Listening to this conversation from the veranda, I couldn't help but wonder what would be written in the master's diary today. This aesthetician is a man who finds his sole pleasure in tossing about such irresponsible nonsense and hoodwinking people. As if totally unconcerned about how the Andrea del Sarto incident might have affected the master's feelings, he continued to chatter away triumphantly: "Yes, it's interesting to occasionally say something in jest and have people take it seriously; it really stirs up a sense of the comic. The other day, I told a student that Nicholas Nickleby had advised Gibbon to stop writing his great life's work, The History of the French Revolution, in French and publish it in English instead. That student had an incredibly good memory, and it was hilarious to hear him seriously repeat exactly what I had told him at a lecture meeting of the Japan Literary Society. What's more, there were about a hundred people in the audience, and they were all listening intently. And there's another funny story. Recently, at a gathering of literary men, the subject of Harrison's historical novel Theophano came up. I remarked that it was the finest of all historical novels, especially the scene where the heroine dies, which is enough to make one's skin crawl. Then, a gentleman sitting opposite me, who never admits to not knowing anything, said, 'Yes, yes, that part is indeed a masterpiece.' So I knew that this man, like myself, had not read the novel." The nervous, dyspeptic master asked with wide eyes, "If you tell such lies, what would you do if the other person had actually read it?" It was as if he felt it was fine to deceive people, but one would be in trouble if the ruse were discovered. The aesthetician was not at all fazed. "Oh, in that case, I'd just say I'd confused it with another book or something," he said, cackling. This aesthetician wears gold-rimmed glasses, but in character, he resembles Kuro of the rickshaw shop. The master sat silently blowing rings of "Hinode" smoke, his face seeming to say, "I don't have that kind of courage." The aesthetician, with a look that seemed to say, "That's why you're no good at painting," continued: "But jokes aside, painting is actually quite difficult. They say Leonardo da Vinci once told his pupils to sketch the stains on the walls of temples. Indeed, if you go into a toilet and gaze intently at a wall where the rain has leaked, you'll find quite excellent patterns forming naturally. Try to pay attention and sketch things like that; I'm sure you'll produce something interesting." "Are you deceiving me again?" "No, this much is certain. It's a very clever saying, isn't it? Just the sort of thing Da Vinci would say." "I see, it's certainly clever," the master said, half-surrendering. However, he does not yet seem to be sketching in the toilet.

Kuro of the rickshaw shop has since become lame. His glossy fur has gradually faded and started to fall out. His eyes, which I once described as more beautiful than amber, are now full of eye-wax. What particularly caught my attention was his loss of spirit and the deterioration of his physique. On the last day I met him in that tea garden, when I asked how he was, he said, "I've had enough of weasel farts and fishmongers' carrying poles."

The red leaves that had added a few touches of crimson among the red pines have scattered like a dream of the past, and the red and white camellias that dropped their petals alternately near the washbasin have all fallen away. Since the winter sun began to set early on the south-facing veranda of three and a half mats, and days when the biting wind does not blow have become rare, I feel as if my nap time has been cut short.

The master goes to school every day. When he returns, he shuts himself in his study. When people visit, he says he hates being a teacher. He rarely paints watercolors anymore. He has also stopped taking Taka-Diastase, saying it has no effect. The children, commendably, never miss a day of kindergarten. When they return, they sing songs, bounce balls, and occasionally dangle me by my tail.

Since I don't eat delicacies, I don't get particularly fat, but I am healthy enough, haven't become lame, and get by from day to day. I never catch rats. I still dislike O-san. They still haven't given me a name, but since there's no end to one's desires if one starts wanting things, I intend to remain a nameless cat in this teacher's house for the rest of my life.