Since the New Year, I have become somewhat famous, and even as a cat, I find it quite gratifying to feel a bit proud.

Early on New Year’s morning, a picture postcard arrived for my master. This was a New Year’s greeting from a certain painter among his circle of friends. The top was painted red and the bottom deep green, and in the center, a single animal was depicted crouching in pastel. In his usual study, my master looked at this picture from the side, then from a vertical angle, admiring the fine colors. Just as I thought he had finished expressing his admiration and would put it down, he began looking at it again from the side and then from above. He twisted his body, stretched out his arms like an old man consulting a book of fortunes, and held it right up to the tip of his nose by the window. I wished he would stop quickly; sitting on his lap, the swaying was becoming dangerously unstable. Just as the rocking finally seemed to subside, he whispered to himself, "I wonder what on earth he painted here." It seemed that while my master admired the colors of the postcard, he had been struggling to identify the true nature of the animal depicted. Wondering what sort of indecipherable postcard it could be, I elegantly half-opened my sleepy eyes and looked with total composure, only to find it was unmistakably a portrait of myself. He might not be a master of the Andrea del Sarto school like my owner, but being a painter, both the form and color were perfectly rendered. Anyone looking at it would know it was a cat. Anyone with even a modicum of discernment would clearly see that it was not just any cat, but myself. When I realized he was struggling so much to understand something so obvious, I felt a bit sorry for the human race. If possible, I wanted to let him know that the picture was of me. Even if he couldn't grasp that it was specifically me, I at least wanted him to understand that it was a cat. However, since humans are animals not blessed by Heaven enough to comprehend the language of us cats, I unfortunately had to leave it at that.

I would like to caution the reader here: it is a very bad habit of humans to habitually evaluate me with a slighting tone, calling me "just a cat" at every turn. To think that cows and horses were made from the dregs of humans, and that cats were manufactured from the dung of cows and horses, is perhaps typical of a teacher who puts on an arrogant face while unaware of his own ignorance, but to an onlooker, it is not a very becoming attitude. No matter how much I am a cat, I was not made so crudely or simply. To an outsider, we may all look the same, equal and undifferentiated, as if no cat has its own inherent characteristics; but once you enter the society of cats, it is quite a complex world, and the human phrase "ten people, ten colors" can be applied here just as well. The eyes, the nose, the coat, the gait—all are different. From the spread of the whiskers to the set of the ears and the hang of the tail, no two are identical. In terms of looks, temperament, likes and dislikes, and refinement or lack thereof, one could say there is an infinite variety. Despite the existence of such clear distinctions, human eyes are always looking up at the sky or some such nonsense, so it is a pity they cannot even distinguish the details of my features, let alone my character. There is an old saying that "like calls to like," and it is true: a mochi maker knows mochi, and only a cat can truly understand a cat. No matter how much humans develop, they will never master this. Moreover, in truth, they are not nearly as great as they believe themselves to be, which makes it all the more difficult. And certainly, in the case of my master, who is so lacking in sympathy, there is nothing to be done, as he is a man who doesn't even understand that the first principle of love is to understand one another completely. Like a stubborn oyster, he sticks to his study and has never once opened his mouth to the outside world. That he maintains a face as if he has achieved some great spiritual insight is quite comical. His lack of insight is proven by the fact that, with my portrait right before his eyes, he shows no sign of realization, and instead says something nonsensical like, "Since this is the second year of the war with Russia, I suppose it's a picture of a bear."

While I was thinking these thoughts with my eyes closed on my master's lap, the maid brought in a second postcard. Looking at it, I saw a printed row of four or five foreign cats lined up, holding pens and opening books, apparently studying. One of them had left its seat and was dancing a Western version of a "cat-dance" at the corner of a desk. Above this, "I Am a Cat" was written boldly in Japanese ink, and to the right, a haiku was inscribed: "Reading or dancing / A cat's spring day / Passes by." This came from a former student of my master, and its meaning should have been obvious to anyone at a glance. Yet, my obtuse master still didn't seem to get it; he tilted his head in wonder and muttered to himself, "I wonder if this is the Year of the Cat." It seems he has not yet noticed that I have become this famous.

Then, the maid brought a third postcard. This time it was not a picture postcard. It said "Happy New Year," and beside it was written: "With all due respect, please convey my regards to the aforementioned cat." Even a master as slow as mine could understand when it was written so plainly. He looked at my face as if finally noticing, letting out a "Hmph." I felt that his gaze contained a certain degree of respect that hadn't been there before. When I consider that my master, whose existence had previously gone unnoticed by the world, has suddenly gained a new prestige entirely thanks to me, I think such a look is only natural.

Just then, the bell at the gate went ting-ting, ting-ting-ting. Likely a visitor. If it's a visitor, the maid will go to receive them. Since I have decided never to go out except when Ume-ko from the fishmonger's comes, I sat calmly on my master's lap as before. My master looked toward the entrance with an uneasy expression, as if a debt collector had burst in. He apparently finds it loathsome to receive New Year's guests and deal with them over sake. When a human becomes this eccentric, there is really nothing more to be said. In that case, he should have gone out early, but he lacks even that much courage. He is truly showing his oyster-like nature. After a while, the maid came and said that Kangetsu-san had arrived. This man, Kangetsu, was apparently a former student of my master, but I hear he has now graduated from school and is doing much better than my master. For some reason, this man often comes to visit. When he comes, he talks only of things that sound like he might have a woman in love with him, or might not; things that make the world seem interesting, or boring; things that sound eerie or amorous; and then he leaves. It is incomprehensible why he goes out of his way to tell such stories to a shriveled-up person like my master, but it is even more amusing that my oyster-like master listens to these talks and occasionally chimes in.

"I haven't seen you for a while. Actually, I've been quite active since the end of last year, and although I kept thinking I should visit, my feet just wouldn't turn in this direction," he said, fiddling with his haori cord and speaking in riddles. "Which direction do your feet turn, then?" my master asked with a serious face, pulling at the sleeve of his black cotton haori with the family crest. This haori is made of cotton and the sleeves are short; the undergarment sticks out about half an inch on both sides. "Hehehe, in a slightly different direction," Kangetsu-kun laughed. I noticed that one of his front teeth was missing today. "Did something happen to your tooth?" my master asked, changing the subject. "Yes, actually, I was eating a shiitake mushroom..." "Eating a what?" "Well, I was eating some shiitake. When I tried to bite through the cap of the mushroom with my front tooth, it just snapped off." "Breaking a front tooth on a shiitake mushroom sounds rather like an old man. It might work for a haiku, but it doesn't seem to work for romance," the master said, lightly patting my head with his palm. "Ah, is that the cat everyone's talking about? It's quite fat, isn't it? It looks like it wouldn't even lose to Kuro from the rickshaw shop. It's magnificent," Kangetsu-kun said, praising me greatly. "It's grown quite a bit lately," my master said, patting my head thud-thud with an air of pride. I am pleased to be praised, but my head hurts a little. "The night before last, we had a small concert," Kangetsu-kun said, returning to the original topic. "Where?" "Oh, you don't need to hear where. It was quite interesting, with three violins and a piano accompaniment. When you have three violins, they're worth listening to even if the players aren't very good. Two of them were women and I joined in, and I thought I played quite well myself." "Hmph. And who were these women?" my master asked enviously. Although my master usually wears a face as cold as a withered tree on a wintry crag, in truth, he is by no means indifferent to women. Once, when he read a certain Western novel, he came across a character who fell slightly in love with almost every woman he met. When he saw it satirically written that the character felt an attachment to nearly seventy percent of the women passing in the street, he was the type of man to be impressed, thinking it was a profound truth. Why such a fickle man leads an oyster-like life is something a cat like me can never understand. Some say it's because of a broken heart; others say it's due to his weak stomach; and still others say it's because he has no money and a cowardly nature. Either way, he is not a figure significant enough to affect the history of the Meiji era, so it doesn't matter. But it is a fact that he enquired about Kangetsu-kun’s female companions with an envious air. Kangetsu-kun interestingly picked up a piece of kamaboko with his chopsticks and bit off half of it with his front teeth. I worried if another one might break, but this time it was fine. "Oh, they're both daughters of a certain family; no one you know," he replied distantly. "I... see," the master said, drawing out the "I" but seemingly omitting the "see" as he lost himself in thought. Perhaps thinking it was about time, Kangetsu-kun prompted him: "The weather is quite fine. If you're free, shall we go for a walk together? The city is in a great festive mood because Port Arthur has fallen." My master, with a face that said he wanted to know the identity of the ladies more than the news of Port Arthur's fall, brooded for a while, but eventually seemed to make up his mind and stood up resolutely, saying, "Well then, let's go." He was still wearing that black cotton haori with the crest over a padded Yuki-tsumugi silk robe that he said was a memento from his brother and had been wearing for twenty years. No matter how durable Yuki-tsumugi is, wearing it like this is too much. It has become thin in places, and when held up to the light, you can see the stitches where patches have been applied from the inside. For my master's clothing, there is no end of the year or beginning of the year. There are no everyday clothes and no formal clothes. When he goes out, he just puts his hands in his sleeves and wanders out. Whether it's because he has nothing else to wear, or because he has things but finds it too much trouble to change, I do not know. However, I am certain of one thing: this neglect cannot be attributed to a broken heart.