Two or three days passed without event, but one day around two in the afternoon, Master Meitei drifted in again as airily as an accidental acolyte. Upon taking his seat, he immediately displayed the vigor of someone bringing an extra edition about the fall of Port Arthur, exclaiming, "Say, did you hear about Ochi Kochi's Takanawa Incident?" "I haven't heard a thing, I haven't seen him lately," replied the master, as gloomy as ever. "I came all this way today despite my busy schedule just to report on that young Kochi's blunder story," Meitei continued. "There you go again with your exaggerations. You really are a most unscrupulous fellow," the master said. "Hahaha! Rather than unscrupulous, I'd say I'm 'unmanageable.' You should at least distinguish the two, as it concerns my reputation." "It's the same thing," the master muttered. He was a pure reincarnation of Tennen Koji. "Apparently, Kochi went to Sengaku-ji in Takanawa last Sunday. He should have known better in this cold weather—besides, visiting Sengaku-ji these days is like being a country bumpkin who doesn't know Tokyo." "That's Kochi's business. You have no right to stop him." "Quite true, I have no right. Rights aside, you know there's that exhibition called the Loyal Retainers' Relics Preservation Society in the temple grounds? Do you know it?" "Nope." "You don't? But surely you've been to Sengaku-ji?" "No." "Never? That's astounding. No wonder you're defending Kochi so much. It's pathetic for an Edokko not to know Sengaku-ji." "One can still be a teacher without knowing it," the master replied, becoming more and more like Tennen Koji. "That may be so, but while Kochi was inside the exhibition hall looking around, a German couple arrived. At first, they apparently asked Kochi something in Japanese. But you know the fellow—he's always dying to use his German. He rattled off a few words, and it turned out unexpectedly well—later he realized that was the root of his misfortune." "And then what happened?" the master asked, finally lured in. "The German saw Ota Gengo's lacquered inro and asked if he could buy it. Kochi's reply was priceless; he said it was impossible because Japanese people are all paragons of integrity. He was in high spirits then, but the German, thinking he'd found a convenient interpreter, started asking him questions incessantly." "About what?" "Well, if one could understand what they were asking, there'd be no worry, but they spoke so fast he couldn't make head or tail of it. Occasionally when he did understand, they were asking about 'tobiguchi' fire hooks or 'kakeya' mallets. The poor fellow had never learned how to translate Western fire hooks or mallets, so he was at a total loss." "That's understandable," the master said, showing sympathy as a fellow teacher. "Meanwhile, idlers began to gather out of curiosity. Eventually, they were surrounded on all sides by people watching Kochi and the Germans. Kochi turned red and started stammering. After his initial confidence, the poor fellow was in a terrible state." "How did it end?" "Finally, Kochi apparently couldn't take it anymore, said 'Sainara' in Japanese, and hurried away. I asked him if people in his province said 'Sainara' instead of 'Sayonara,' and he said they usually say 'Sayonara,' but since he was dealing with a Westerner, he changed it to 'Sainara' for the sake of harmony. I was impressed that Kochi is a man who doesn't forget harmony even in times of distress." "'Sainara' is fine, but what about the Germans?" "The Germans were supposedly left agape, staring blankly. Hahaha! Isn't it funny?" "It doesn't seem particularly funny. You, who come all this way just to report it, are far funnier," the master said, flicking his cigarette ash into the brazier. Just then, the bell at the gate rang so loudly it made them jump, and a sharp woman's voice called out, "Excuse me!" Meitei and the master involuntarily looked at each other and fell silent. Seeing as female guests were rare at the master's house, I watched as the owner of that sharp voice entered, her crepe silk robes rustling against the tatami. She looked to be slightly over forty. Her hairline had receded, and her bangs rose as high as an embankment project, protruding toward the sky for at least half the length of her face. Her eyes were slanted like the slope of Kiridoushi Hill, two straight lines pulled upward facing each other. 'Straight lines' is a description implying they were thinner than a whale's. Only her nose was inordinately large. It looked as if she had stolen someone else's nose and planted it in the middle of her face. Like a stone lantern from a shrine moved into a tiny garden, it dominated everything but felt somehow unsettled. It was what is called a hook-nose; it had tried its best to be high, but halfway through, as if thinking this was too much, it had become humble and drooped at the tip, peering down at the lips below. Because of this remarkable nose, whenever this woman spoke, it seemed less like her mouth was speaking and more like her nose was doing the talking. To show respect to this magnificent nose, I intend to refer to this woman as 'Hanako' (Mrs. Nose) from now on. Hanako first finished her initial greetings and then glared around the room, saying, 'What a wonderful residence this is.' The master, saying 'Liar' in his head, puffed away on his tobacco. Meitei, looking at the ceiling, prompted the master by saying, 'Say, is that a rain leak or the grain of the wood? A strange pattern is appearing there.' 'A rain leak, of course,' the master replied. 'How marvelous,' Meitei said coolly. Hanako fumed inwardly, thinking these people knew nothing of social graces. For a while, the three of them sat in silence. 'I have come because there is something I wish to ask,' Hanako said, breaking the silence again. 'Hmph,' the master replied with extreme coldness. Thinking this wouldn't do, Hanako continued, 'Actually, I live quite nearby—in the corner estate of the alley across the way.' 'The one with the large Western-style house and the storehouse? No wonder there's a nameplate for "Kaneda" out there,' the master said, finally recognizing the Kaneda mansion and storehouse, though his level of respect for Mrs. Kaneda remained unchanged. 'Actually, my husband is out, so I've come to speak; he's very busy with his companies,' she said, giving him a look as if to see if that hit the mark. The master was entirely unmoved. He was already dissatisfied because Hanako's manner of speech was far too overbearing for a woman meeting someone for the first time. 'And it's not just one company, he's involved in two or three. And he's a director in all of them—I'm sure you know of him.' She wore a look that asked if he was sufficiently cowed. Ordinarily, the master was a man who felt great awe toward Doctors or university professors, but strangely, his level of respect for businessmen was extremely low. He believed a middle-school teacher was greater than a businessman. Even if he didn't believe it, his inflexible nature led him to resign himself to the fact that he could never expect the patronage of businessmen or wealthy men. No matter how powerful or wealthy the other party was, he was quite indifferent to the interests of anyone he had no prospect of being helped by. Thus, except for the scholarly world, he was quite ignorant of other areas, especially the business world, and had no idea who was doing what. Even if he knew, not a shred of respect or awe would arise. Hanako never dreamed that such an eccentric person could be living in a corner of the world, basking in the same sunlight. She had dealt with many people until now, and there had never been a case where their treatment of her didn't change immediately upon her introducing herself as Kaneda's wife. No matter what gathering she attended or what high-ranking person she stood before, she could always pass as Mrs. Kaneda; she had expected that even an old, dusty student like this would be awestruck before he even heard her husband's profession if she just mentioned she lived in the corner estate. 'Do you know anyone named Kaneda?' the master asked Meitei casually. 'Sure, Mr. Kaneda is a friend of my uncle's. He was at a garden party just the other day,' Meitei replied seriously. 'Oh? And who is your uncle?' 'Baron Makiyama,' Meitei said, becoming even more serious. Before the master could say anything, Hanako suddenly turned and looked at Meitei. Meitei sat coolly in his Oshima silk and imported sarasa robes. 'Oh! Are you related to Lord Makiyama? I had no idea; please forgive my rudeness. My husband is always saying how much he is in Lord Makiyama's debt,' she said, suddenly using polite language and even offering a bow. Meitei laughed, 'Oh, it's nothing, hahaha!' The master, taken aback, watched the two in silence. 'I believe Lord Makiyama was very kind as to look into some marriage arrangements for my daughter as well...' 'Oh? Is that so?' Meitei said, sounding a bit startled as this was too sudden even for him. 'Actually, we have offers coming in from all quarters, but since we have our social standing to consider, we can't just marry her off anywhere...' 'Quite right,' Meitei said, finally feeling at ease. 'That is what I came to ask you about,' Hanako said, turning back to the master and suddenly reverting to her overbearing tone. 'I hear a man named Mizushima Kangetsu visits you often; what sort of person is he exactly?' 'What do you want with Kangetsu?' the master asked sourly. 'I suppose you wish to know a bit about Mr. Kangetsu's character in relation to your daughter's marriage arrangements?' Meitei interjected cleverly. 'It would be very convenient if I could hear that...' 'So, are you saying you want to give your daughter to Kangetsu?' 'It's not that I "want" to give her,' Hanako said, immediately putting the master in his place. 'Since there are many other offers, we won't be in any trouble even if he doesn't take her.' 'Then there's no need to ask about Kangetsu, is there?' the master snapped. 'But surely there's no reason to hide anything,' Hanako said, becoming somewhat combative. Meitei sat between the two, holding his silver pipe like a referee's fan, shouting 'Ready, set, go!' in his heart. 'So, did Kangetsu say he definitely wanted her?' the master fired a direct shot. 'It's not that he said he wanted her, but...' 'Do you think he "would" want her?' the master realized that direct shots were the way to go with this woman. 'Things haven't gone quite that far—but surely Mr. Kangetsu wouldn't be entirely displeased?' she said, regaining her footing. 'Is there some reason to believe Kangetsu has fallen in love with your daughter?' the master asked, leaning back as if to say, 'Go ahead and tell me.' 'Well, that's about the size of it,' she replied. This time, the master's shot had no effect at all. Meitei, who had been watching the scene with amusement like a referee, seemed to have his curiosity piqued by Hanako's remark; he put down his pipe and leaned forward. 'Did Kangetsu send your daughter a love letter? This is marvelous! Another anecdote to add to the New Year, what a great story!' he said, delighted all by himself.
"It's not a love letter, it's something much more intense. Don't you both know?" Hanako said with a knowing smirk. "Do you know?" the master asked Meitei, looking bewildered. Meitei replied foolishly, "I don't. If anyone knows, it's you," showing unnecessary modesty. "No, you both know it," Hanako said triumphantly. "Oh?" they both wondered. "If you've forgotten, I shall tell you. At the end of last year, there was a concert at Lord Abe's mansion in Mukojima, and Mr. Kangetsu attended, didn't he? On his way home that night, something happened at Azuma Bridge... I won't go into details, as it might trouble him... but I think that evidence is quite enough, don't you?" She aligned her fingers, adorned with a diamond ring, on her lap and sat up straight. Her great nose shone even more brilliantly, making Meitei and the master seem as if they were hardly there. The master, and even the usually unfazed Meitei, were taken aback by this surprise attack. They sat dazed for a while, like patients whose fever had just broken. But as their shock loosened and they returned to their normal selves, a sense of comedy rushed in all at once. As if by agreement, they both burst into laughter. Only Hanako, finding her expectations thwarted, glared at them, thinking it extremely rude to laugh at such a moment. "So that was the young lady? I see, that's perfect. Exactly as you say! Right, Kushami? There's no doubt Kangetsu is in love with her... Since there's no use hiding it anymore, why don't we confess?" "Mmm," the master grunted. "You really mustn't hide it; the evidence is all there," Hanako said, feeling proud again. "Well, it can't be helped. We shall state the facts about Mr. Kangetsu for your reference. Come, Kushami, you're the host; it's no good just smirking like that. Secrets are truly terrifying things, aren't they? No matter how you hide them, they leak out from somewhere. —Still, it's quite a wonder, Mrs. Kaneda. How did you discover this secret? It's truly surprising," Meitei chattered away. "I haven't been idle on my end," Hanako said with a smug look. "You seem to have been a bit too busy. Who on earth told you?" "From the wife of the rickshaw man right behind here." "The rickshaw man with the black cat?" the master asked, eyes wide. "Yes, regarding Mr. Kangetsu, I've used her quite a bit. Every time Mr. Kangetsu comes here, I wonder what stories he tells, so I asked the rickshaw man's wife to let me know every single detail." "That's outrageous!" the master shouted. "Oh, I'm not concerned with what you say or do. It's only about Mr. Kangetsu." "Whether it's about Kangetsu or anyone else—that rickshaw man's wife is a detestable creature," the master fumed. "But it's her business if she stands outside your fence, isn't it? If you don't want your conversations heard, you should speak more quietly or move to a larger house," Hanako said without a hint of a blush. "It's not just the rickshaw man. I've also heard a great deal from the lute teacher in Shimmichi." "About Kangetsu?" "Not just about Mr. Kangetsu," she said ominously. One might have expected the master to be cowed, but instead, he said, "That teacher puts on such a refined air, acting as if she's the only human around. She's a fool." "Excuse me, she is a woman. 'Fool' is the wrong word," Hanako's language was increasingly revealing her true colors. It was like she had come just to pick a fight. Meitei, being Meitei, listened to this negotiation with amusement. He watched with total composure, like the immortal Tieguai watching gamecocks fight. Realizing he was no match for Hanako in an exchange of insults, the master was forced into silence for a while. Then, as if struck by a thought, he said, "You keep saying Kangetsu is the one in love with your daughter, but that's not what I heard. Right, Meitei?" seeking his friend's help. "Right. According to that story, it was the young lady who fell ill first—I heard she was even saying things in her delirium." "Nonsense," Mrs. Kaneda said in her sharp, direct manner. "But Kangetsu said he heard it from the wife of Dr. OO." "That was our move. We asked Dr. OO's wife to see if we could get Mr. Kangetsu's attention." "And Dr. OO's wife agreed to that?" "Yes. Even for her, it wasn't done for free. I've used various gifts for this and that." "So you are determined not to leave until you've pried every bit of information out about Mr. Kangetsu?" Meitei asked, sounding a bit annoyed and using uncharacteristically rough words. "No, my friend, there's no harm in talking. Let's talk, Kushami. —Madam, both Kushami and I will tell you everything we can regarding Mr. Kangetsu that isn't problematic. —Yes, it would be best if you asked your questions in order." Hanako finally agreed and began her questions. Her tone, which had been rough for a moment, became polite again toward Meitei. "I hear Mr. Kangetsu is also a Bachelor of Science, but what exactly is his specialty?" "At graduate school, he is researching the earth's magnetism," the master replied seriously. Unfortunately, Hanako didn't understand the meaning. "I see," she said, looking puzzled. "If he studies that, can he become a Doctor?" "Are you saying he can't do it unless he becomes a Doctor?" the master asked unpleasantly. "Well, there are plenty of ordinary Bachelors," Hanako replied unconcernedly. The master looked at Meitei with an even more disgusted face. "We can't guarantee whether he'll become a Doctor or not, so let's move on to something else," Meitei said, also not in the best of moods. "Is he still studying that earth thing lately?" "Two or three days ago, he gave a lecture at the Physical Science Association on the results of his research into the 'Mechanics of Hanging'," the master said without thinking. "Oh, how dreadful! Hanging? What an eccentric man. If he's doing things like hanging, he surely can't become a Doctor, can he?" "It would be difficult if he hung himself, but as for the mechanics of it, it's not impossible." "Is that so?" she asked, looking at the master's face to see if he was serious. Sadly, she didn't understand what "mechanics" meant and felt unsettled. But perhaps thinking it would damage her prestige as Mrs. Kaneda to ask such a thing, she tried to read the signs from his expression. The master's face was sour. "Is there anything else he's studying that's easier to understand?" "Let's see. He once wrote a paper on 'The Stability of Acorns' and its relation to the movement of celestial bodies." "Do they study things like acorns at the university?" "Well, I'm a layman so I don't know, but since Mr. Kangetsu is doing it, it must be worth researching," Meitei teased coolly. Hanako, realizing academic questions were beyond her, changed the subject. "On a different note—I hear he bit off two of his front teeth while eating a shiitake mushroom this New Year?" "Yes, and some Kuya-mochi got stuck in the gap," Meitei said, suddenly cheered up by a question in his area of expertise. "Isn't he a man with no sense of romance? Why on earth wouldn't he use a toothpick?" "I'll remind him next time I see him," the master chuckled. "If he breaks his teeth on a shiitake, his teeth must be in very poor condition. What do you think?" "One could hardly call them good—right, Meitei?" "They aren't good, but they have a certain charm. It's quite strange that he hasn't had them fixed yet. It's still a landing spot for Kuya-mochi; it's quite a sight." "Is he leaving them broken because he has no pocket money for a dentist, or is it out of some whim?" "He won't be calling himself 'Broken-Tooth' forever, so don't worry," Meitei said, his mood gradually recovering. Hanako changed the subject again. "If you have any letters or such written by the man himself, I'd like to take a look." "I have plenty of postcards. Here," the master said, bringing out thirty or forty from his study. "I don't need to see that many—just two or three..." "Let me see, I'll pick out some good ones," Meitei said. "This one should be interesting," he said, holding out a picture postcard. "Oh, does he draw as well? He's quite versatile. Let's see... Oh, how dreadful! It's a tanuki. Why on earth would he choose to draw a tanuki? —Still, it's a wonder that it actually looks like one," she admitted with slight admiration. "Read the message," the master said with a laugh. Hanako began to read it like a maid reading a newspaper. "'On New Year's Eve by the old calendar, the mountain tanuki hold a garden party and dance vigorously. Their song goes: Come, it's New Year's Eve, even the Mountain-Wife won't come. Suppoko-pon-no-pon.' What is this? Is he making a fool of me?" Hanako looked dissatisfied. "Do you not like this celestial maiden?" Meitei held out another one. It showed a maiden in a robe of feathers playing a lute. "The nose on this maiden is a bit too small..." "Nonsense, that's normal. Read the words, not the nose." The message said: "Once there was an astronomer. One night, as he climbed his high tower to gaze at the stars as usual, a beautiful celestial maiden appeared in the sky and played music more delicate than anything heard in this world. The astronomer was so entranced he forgot the biting cold. In the morning, the astronomer's corpse was found covered in white frost. This is a true story, said the lying old man." "What is this? It has no meaning at all. Can a man really pass as a Bachelor of Science with this? He really should read some Bungei Kurabu magazine," Hanako said, giving Kangetsu-kun a thorough drubbing. Meitei, half for fun, held out a third one. This time it was a printed picture of a sailing boat, with the usual scribbling underneath. "'The sixteen-year-old girl at last night's anchorage, having no parents, cried at the plovers on the rocky shore, the plovers waking her from her night's sleep; her parents were sailors beneath the waves.'" "How lovely! Quite impressive. He's quite the talker, isn't he?" "Is he?" "Yes, this would go well with a shamisen." "If it goes with a shamisen, it's the real thing. How about this one?" Meitei continued to offer them. "No, I've seen enough. I understand now that he's not so 'unrefined'." Hanako seemed to have finished most of her questions about Kangetsu. "I am very sorry for the intrusion. Please keep my visit a secret from Mr. Kangetsu," she requested selfishly. It seemed her policy was that she must know everything about Kangetsu, but Kangetsu must know nothing of her. When Meitei and the master gave listless replies, she stood up, emphasizing: "I shall reward you for this in due course." As soon as the two of them returned to their seats after seeing her off, Meitei asked, "What was that?" and the master asked at the same time, "What was that?" From the inner room, the sound of the mistress's suppressed giggling could be heard. Meitei shouted in a loud voice, "Madam, Madam! A specimen of the 'commonplace' has arrived! Even the commonplace is quite striking when it reaches that level. Now, don't hold back—laugh as much as you like!"